Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lobsson. Today
I'm joined by Doctor Mark Wicklair. He's professor of
philosophy emeritus at West Virginia University, and today we're
going to talk about his book Conscientious Objection in
Medicine. So Mark, welcome to the show. It's a
pleasure to everyone.
Well, thank you for inviting me.
So let's start perhaps with a definition or at
least an understanding of the main subject we're going
to tackle today. So what is conscientious objection?
Well, conscientious objection essentially is a refusal to provide
services, um, and in the case of healthcare, it
would be healthcare services. Uh, A refusal that is
based on um the provider's ethical beliefs, and those
ethical beliefs can either be based on just straightforward
secular principles, um, or they can be based on
religious principles. But the important, really essential characteristic of
a conscientious objection or a conscientious refusal to provide
a service is that it is based on the
provider's ethical beliefs because there are a lot of
other reasons for refusing to provide medical services. Um.
So, for example, surgeons frequently will just say, um,
well, if, if a patient requests a, uh, let's
say brain surgery for a brain tumor, the surgeon
can simply respond, well, I'm sorry, but it's not
operable. And that's not based on ethical beliefs, but
it's based on uh clinical criteria. Um, ANOTHER possible
reason, um, is, for example, in relation even to
abortion, um, the provider's refusal may be based on
a concern about their own health or well-being. Um,
SO in the US at least, there have been
some cases where abortion providers have been subject to
violence and in some cases actually killed. So, an
OBGYN who has absolutely no moral objection to abortion
might simply refuse to provide it out of a
concern for their own, their own safety. Then the
providers can refuse to provide requested services, um, for
financial reasons. And again, in the US at least,
um, there are reimbursements for um the Medicaid program.
Uh, WHICH, uh, are quite low. And so some
providers just simply say, well, I'm not going to
treat, um, patients on Medicare or Medicaid because it's
just not worthwhile for me. Uh, OTHER reasons include
it's contrary to professional, uh, professional codes, uh, and
that would subject them to disciplinary action and they
want to avoid that. And another one finally is
that it's illegal in the jurisdiction that they're in.
And so again, it's not that they have a
moral objection to providing the service, it's that it,
it's illegal. So that's why it's so important to
keep in mind that in the cases of conscientious
objection, The objection is based on moral beliefs.
Right, uh, so we're going to tackle conscientious objection
from a philosophical perspective, but it can also be
a legal concept. So what are the differences between
how conscientious objection is approached in the law and
how it is approached in ethics?
Well, actually, the two approaches are similar in at
least one respect. And that respect is, um, the,
the challenge in both cases is to uh strike
some sort of balance between two competing interests. Um,
ONE is a physician's interest in, uh, practicing medicine.
Which is in a way that's consistent with their
ethical beliefs. And the other category of interest are
patients' interest in having timely and convenient access to
uh healthcare services that they want. So in both
cases, in the law and in ethics, and uh
the, the primary challenge is how one strikes that
balance. Um, NOW, the primary difference, I think, is
It's only in the case of ethical approaches that
striking that balance requires ethical justification and is ethical
guidance. In the case of law, that's not a,
that's not a requirement, but in the case of
ethical considerations, it is.
So in the book you distinguish between conscientious objection
and a few other concepts in bioethics which can
be similar to it or at least adjacent to
it. Let's start with conscientious provision. What is that?
So conscientious uh provision is really some, uh, it,
it's also an appeal to conscience. But it's the
reverse of conscientious objection. Um, CONSCIENTIOUS objection is a
refusal. To provide requested services based on one's ethical
beliefs. In the case of conscientious provision. It's in
situations where certain services are prohibited. It can be
prohibited by institutional, uh, uh, policies. It can be
prohibited by law. It can be, uh, prohibited by,
um, uh, professional organizations, codes of ethics, but it's
prohibited. To provide the service. And physicians believe now
in this case, well, they have an ethical obligation
to provide it. And at least in the US
this comes up now quite frequently with respect to
abortion post the Dobbs decision. That's the Supreme Court
decision that overturned Roe versus Wade. So now abortion
is no longer a constitutionally protected right in the
US, which means that states can pass a number
of restrictions. ON abortion. Uh, SOME outlaw it completely.
Some have, uh, restrictions that are, are, are, are
quite, quite restrictive. Um, AND then for, uh, OBGYNs,
um, might believe, well, even though it's illegal. To
provide an abortion in this case, the well-being of
my patient requires it. Uh, SHE'S at, at risk
of severe morbidity or mortality if I don't provide
it. Um, AND so conscientious provision then would be,
well, um, my conscience tells me I have an
obligation to provide it. And then the question is,
how is that dealt with? But that's, that's, as
I said, it's the reverse of conscientious, um, of
conscientious objection. Another, uh, fairly frequent case again in
the United States, uh, is, um, the procedure of,
uh, providing gender-affirming care to adolescents. And in that
case, there are a number of states, I think
um now about 26 states that prohibit providing gender-affirming
care to adolescents, uh, even with parental um approval.
And now there are a number of physicians and
a number of professional organizations um that take the
view that, well, but these procedures, in some cases,
Um, are absolutely essential for the health and well-being
of adolescents and patients. And again, uh, in cases
where it's in states where it's illegal, there still
is a belief among, uh, providers that they are
violating their obligations to their patients uh if they
don't provide those services.
And what is conscience? What does that mean?
Well, conscience, uh, is a very complex concept. There
are a number of different interpretations of it, conceptions
of conscience. Um, TO some extent, the different conceptions
of conscience can be distinguished by, um. The kind
of questions they ask, they can ask questions that
are uh more metaphysical, like what is the nature
of conscience, uh, what is the function of conscience,
what kind of entity is conscience. Um, THEY, they
can uh differ on answers to epistemological questions, uh,
you know, what is the epistemological status of conscience?
Um, IS it? Is it an ethical guide at
all? And if it is an ethical guide, is
it a reliable ethical guide? Um, uh, NOW, there
are different answers to those kinds of questions. Another
question that's asked is, uh, what's the origin of
conscience? And some, some views say, well, it's basically,
uh, comes from God. The conscience is the voice
of God. Those are religious conceptions of conscience. Um.
Now, I think one way of understanding conscience was
that without getting into this very complex philosophical debate
about how we should understand con uh conscience, um,
is to think of conscience, at least in the,
when we're, when we're, um, analyzing conscientious objection in
healthcare. IS to think of it as a physician's.
MORAL compass. Or if you will, moral GPS.
OK. Uh, A third concept that you explore in
the book is moral complicity. What is that?
Moral complicity, um, really what that is, is a
belief that it's not just direct provision. Of a
service, whether it's abortion or contraception or medical assistance
in dying, it's not just the direct provision of
that, that is contrary to a person's conscience. But
it's any involvement at all. In the provision or
facilitation of that service. So this would extend then
conscientious objection to, for example, referring. To, um. Uh,
INFORMING patients of the availability of, of a, of
a medical service. Um, IT has extended, uh, to
non-physicians, nurses, um, aides in, in, in the, in
the, uh, sense that nurses have sometimes refused on
the grounds of complicity, um. To be involved in
pre-abortion care or post-abortion care. Um, SOME, in, to,
to extend it even further, uh, aides have and
have objected, um, in doing it, cleaning instruments or
providing instruments. Uh, FILE clerks have objected. Um, AMBULANCE
drivers have objected to transporting. Patients to abortion clinics.
Um, SO complicity then is just the view that
any involvement. Can be perceived. As being a moral
wrong, even if it's not directly involved in providing
that service.
So, so one final concept before we move on
to other topics, what is moral integrity?
Moral integrity, uh, again, like most philosophical concepts, uh,
there are a number of different conceptions of it.
Um, MY conception focuses on What I call core
moral beliefs. Um, AND that's sort of the notion
that, um, individuals who have core moral beliefs, these
are beliefs that are just very deep-seated to them.
In a way, they're connected with their sense of
who they're, they are, with their identity. Um, AND
their integrity, their moral integrity involves acting in accordance
with those core ethical beliefs. So an example of
how a provider might think that providing a medical
service is contrary to their core moral beliefs or
moral integrity, uh, in the case of, let's say,
medical assistance in dying, would be if the provider
were to sort of believe that providing this service
is just something they can't live with. Um, IT'S
contrary to their understanding of who they are. Um,
AND in that sense of their identity. And, and
so for me at least, or my, my, my
analysis, uh, to protect one's integrity. Um, REQUIRES acting
in accordance with one's core ethical beliefs and undermining
and, and to, um, act contrary to those core
ethical beliefs undermines one, one's, uh, integrity. And I
make this distinction between More where moral integrity is
at stake, and it's. Simply what I call peripheral
moral beliefs. Um, YOU know, like there are a
lot of things in life, um, that we find
unfair or unjust, and we just live with them.
You know, we sort of say, well, you know,
the world is unjust, uh, and we have to
kind of, um, um, accommodate that in our lives,
or, or we, we go to use the technical
term, crazy. Um, WHEREAS core moral beliefs are, are
not that easily, uh, disregardable because they do cut
to the core of who we think we are.
And that is what involves uh integrity, moral integrity.
So all of these concepts, conscientious provision, conscience, moral
complicity, and moral integrity, do they play a role
in conscientious objection? Do they relate to it in
some way?
Yes, absolutely. Um, AND, you know, as I said,
when it comes to conscientious objection, um, the kind
of the strongest claims that providers would have. For
accommodation. Uh, ARE those that are based on, uh,
protecting one's moral integrity. Uh, THERE are a lot
of other reasons for accommodating conscientious objection in healthcare,
but at least I think that the primary reason
is its connection to moral integrity.
Mhm. And what would you say are the main
ethical controversies surrounding conscientious objection in medicine?
Well, one of the basic ones is whether it
should be tolerated at all. Uh, AND there are
some, uh, writers on conscientious objection in healthcare who
take the extreme position that no, it just shouldn't
be accommodated. Um, SO that's a, a sort of
what I'd say as a, as a threshold question
or a threshold controversy. Uh, SHOULD it be tolerated
at all? Uh, AMONG those who think it should
be tolerated. Um, THEN the controversy centers on, well,
OK, it should be tolerated, but what should be
required. Of physicians who are accommodated, who are permitted
to refuse to provide services. And then there's debates
about, well, OK, should they be required to um
refer. Patients to to providers who will provide the
service. Should they be required at least to inform
patients of the availability, even though they won't provide
it? Should they make sure that patients at least
are aware of the fact that these services are
available? And there have been studies uh related to
the um. Uh, SO-CALLED morning after pill or Plan
B or Ella, um, where patients who come into
emergency departments, uh, rape victims, um, actually are not
aware of the fact that there is emergency contraception.
And um so the question then would be, well,
in cases like that or to make sure that
patients do have awareness of at least the availability,
should there be an, a requirement to at least
inform patients, say, well, there is this service, I
won't provide it, but there is this service. Um,
THEN there's a question of um whether or not.
Um, PROVIDERS should be required to justify. Their refusal.
Um, Should we just take them on their word
that it's contrary to their conscience, or should we
require them to at least provide some justification for
that refusal? Uh, WHERE we would scrutinize their beliefs,
their moral beliefs, and see whether or not they
can give, um, a plausible, acceptable defense of those,
uh, of those beliefs. Um, THOSE are some of
the kind of major controversies that, that still remain.
Um, AGAIN, once the threshold is crossed. And um
at least there's some acknowledgement that, that, um, uh,
conscientious objection should be accommodated. Oh, I should add,
uh, one other controversy is about, um, advanced notification.
And that is whether or not uh physicians who
conscientiously object have an obligation. Um, LET'S say within
institutions to inform supervisors in advance, uh, rather than
at the last minute. Um, AND whether or not
there's an obligation to inform patients, uh, in advance
so that it's not, uh, after the patient, uh,
well, after the patient-physician relationship is already established, and
then after the patient requests the service. Um, THE
controversy is, well, should those kinds of situations be
avoided if, if possible by, um, requiring physicians to
make it clear to patients, um, ideally in advance
of even, um, forming that relationship that they, uh,
object to it. Uh, AND there are a number
of ways of doing that. Uh, ONE could post,
uh, online. Uh, SOME notification that, that this particular
person doesn't provide certain services. Um, THIS could be
done at the time that patients request the first
appointment. Um, BUT there are a number of different,
you know, uh, views about that, and again, that's
a, that's a controversial issue.
So let me ask you about one of the
controversies you focus on the most in your book,
and it has to do with whether conscientious objection
is compatible with physicians' professional obligations. Could you explain
that controversy?
Sure. Well, that controversy um typically arises um in
the context of uh those who object to conscientious
objection in healthcare. Um, AND one of the primary,
uh, reasons they have for objection is to claim
that conscientious objection is contrary to the professional obligations
of physicians. Um, AND so that really requires some
analysis of what those professional obligations are. And those
who argue that it's um an incompatible with professional
obligations, typically cite um what is, uh, I think
a, a widely recognized general principle in healthcare and
not just in medicine, also in nursing, also in
pharmacy, um, which is to put patients' interests first.
Uh, PUT patients, uh, interests, well-being first. And so
that leads, I think, to the, at least those
who object to conscientious objection, then simply assume. That
this principle. What I refer to as the patient's
interest first principle, um, just rules out conscientious objection
because physicians who conscientiously object are putting their interests
above patients' interests. Um, AND I think that reflects
a failure. To provide a plausible specification of this
principle. Um, AGAIN, I think it is a widely
held principle, but it's extremely general and vague. And
surely, it cannot require physicians to totally disregard their
interests. Um, IF that were the case, physicians couldn't
take vacations. They couldn't say, I don't, uh, I,
I won't come to your house. They couldn't say,
um, I don't, I, I, I'm not, uh, you
know, I'm not available on weekends, um. They would
basically be the slaves of patients, and that's, that's
clearly implausible. So there have to be some kind
of boundaries. To this notion And that, it seems
to me, is the major, a major question in
relation to conscientious objection is what is a plausible
specification of this principle, and then examine the implications
of this plausibly specified principle for conscientious objection. And
at least my view is that um that there
is no plausible specification of this principle that would
rule out in principle conscientious objection. At most, what
it would require um are some require some specific
requirements among objectors to qualify for conscientious objections. And
again, that goes back to a question we considered
before, which is what are some of the requirements
or constraints that might apply to conscientious objectors in
terms of referral, in terms of informing, in terms
of advanced notification, and so on.
So let me ask you a little bit more
about the compatibist and the incompatible position as you
referred to them there, because there are people, as
you said, that think that conscientious objection is compatible
with physicians' professional obligations, and there are people who
think that it is incompatible. Starting with the incompatible
position, what do you think are the main issues
with it?
Well, the incompatibleness, um, it seems to me rely
heavily on, um, the professional or the, the alleged
professional obligations of physicians. And so, uh, as I've
already said, one of the issues there as well,
uh, to provide some specification. Of those professional obligations,
uh, obligations, and not just this general vague notion
of putting patients' interests first. Um, AND I think
the second issue is that incompatibles, um, tend to
focus, um, on the fact that, that physicians are
professionals. And as such have professional obligations. But I
think what they give, what they give inadequate attention
to is that, yes, physicians are professionals. They do
have professional obligations, but they're also moral agents. Um,
AND, uh, along with moral agency comes, um, a
some sphere of, um, Of what? Of autonomy in
which one can make moral judgments. Um, AND, and
that I think is, is given, is, is not
given sufficient attention by incompatibles.
And in the case of compatible lists, you explore
the challenge for those who support a reason giving
requirement. Could you explain that challenge?
OK. So, um, I think there are a number
of reasons to question the, uh, uh, uh, reason-giving
requirement. Again, and that would, that would be a
public justification. Of a refusal to provide a particular
service. Now, one problem with that view. Um, IT'S
not clear that providing a justification. Um, IS a
requirement, it is, is a justifiable or defensible requirement.
Now, I'm a philosopher and I'm a teacher. And
I certainly value the ability to provide justifications for
one's beliefs and to critically analyze one's beliefs. But
my, my kind of issue is, my question is,
should that be a requirement in relation to conscientious
objection? And if, as I maintain, Um, protecting. Physicians'
ability to practice medicine consistent with their core moral
beliefs and their moral integrity. If that's an aim.
Of of tolerating conscientious objection. Um, OF accommodation. Then
it seems to me that it's unclear that we
should probe into their justifications. Why? Well, because their
moral integrity is at stake, right? If those are
their, their core moral beliefs. If they have that
importance to the physician. Then it seems to me,
if we want to protect moral integrity. If we
want to give providers some space in which to
practice medicine consistent with maintaining their moral integrity, consistent
with their moral, with their core moral beliefs, then
it's just, as I said, unclear that giving that
this requirement to provide a justification is defensible. Another
problem I have with a reason, public reason giving
justification. I That It, in some cases, it, it
might be construed as a violation of, of privacy.
Um, Physicians might be reluctant. I mean, in one
case, they might lack the ability to provide, right,
the, the critical philosophical skills to provide a justification
that's at least acceptable to whoever is um reviewing
them. Um, BUT another, another possibility is they don't
want to. Um, BECAUSE they've hold these beliefs as
being very personal, and this could be specifically in,
in relation to religious beliefs that they just don't
want to disclose that. They don't want to be
cross-examined about those very intimate personal beliefs. And, and
finally, um, I worry. That requiring Physicians, conscientious objectors.
To provide a justification to someone else. Whether it
be uh an administrator, um, a department head, or
as some have proposed a tribunal. Um, THAT a
requirement to provide a justification that satisfies someone else.
Might introduce arbitrariness. And subjectivity. Into whether or not
conscientious objectors are accommodated because what is acceptable to
me may not be acceptable to you in terms
of a justification, and it may, you know, introduce
in that way bias, and that I think it
would be, uh, would be a mistake and regrettable,
and I worry that Um, that is unavoidable if,
if we require, again, if we require, um, physicians,
objectors to provide a justification, which whoever it is
that's reviewing this justification finds acceptable.
When it comes to requiring conscientious objectors to inform
and refer patients, what would you say are the
main arguments for and against those kinds of requirements?
Well, I think the main argument for those kinds
of requirements um is a concern about patients. And
whether refusals will impede Uh, timely access to, um,
important medical services. Um, AND it's that concern that
leads to, uh, at least in, in my mind,
it's that concern that is the primary reason, uh,
that defenders give for requiring, uh, referral, uh, and
informing. Now, I think the primary kind of argument
against that or or reason to question that. Is
To question whether. In all cases, Referral informing is,
is required. And I think it would be better
in terms of striking an appropriate balance between the
interests of physicians and maintaining moral integrity and the
interests of patients and timely access. Uh, IT would
be a better way of striking that balance to
have a context-dependent approach. So, in some cases, it
may very well not be required for the physician
themselves to provide the information or to provide the
referral. Uh, FOR example, in a, um, hospital emergency
department. In which one of the many uh ED
physicians objects to emergency contraception, um, it might be
possible. Depending on the staffing and the size of
the, of the hospital. It might be possible to
set up a procedure where rape victims who come
into the ED uh uh are, are, uh, directed
by nurses or by whoever does the uh the
initial screening, um, uh, to. To be to be
seen by physicians who don't object. And in that
way, it wouldn't be on the individual objector to
provide that information or refer. Um, IT would be
other people who do it. And so that, I
think, would strike a, a better, um, more justifiable
balance if it's possible. Now, in many cases, it
will not be feasible. To set up those kinds
of uh procedures. And in that case, uh, a
referral requirement is, is certainly justified or an informant
um requirement is certainly justified. But as I said,
um, it may not be, uh, it may it
it that. Satisfying the goal of. Protecting patients' timely
access to medical services may not require a blanket.
Referral or informing requirement.
Another controversy you explore in the book is the
justifiability of a symmetry between responses to conscientious objectors
and conscientious providers. What is this controversy about?
Well, the controversy, first of all, what is the
asymmetry and the, the asymmetry, um, is that whereas
it's very common. Uh, BOTH in law and in,
uh, policy. To Tolerate conscientious objectors, to accommodate conscientious
objectors. Um, ALBEIT sometimes with requirements, but at least
it's common to, um, to, to accommodate. Whereas in
the case of conscientious providers, For example, um, OBGYNs
who think they have an obligation to provide abortions
in cases that are not legally permitted or, um,
pediatricians who believe that they have an obligation to
provide gender-affirming care where it's legally prohibited, um, there
is generally no accommodation whatsoever. Um, AND so the
controversy is there is, well, is that justified? Um,
IF the idea is. That we want to protect.
Physicians moral integrity. We want to provide a space
for them. To practice medicine. Without undermining their moral
integrity. Then it seems like this asymmetry is unjustified
because in both cases, Um, a physician's moral integrity
is at stake. In both cases, um, by hypothesis,
a physician's core moral beliefs are at stake. So
what is the justification for treating them differently?
And what are the main arguments for this symmetry
and how do you evaluate them? Are they good
enough?
Um, WELL, there are a, a couple of, of
arguments. Um, ONE is an argument that Uh, focuses
on the law, but it could also apply, as
opposed, to policy. And that is an argument of
um inconsistency. So the claim is, well, look, if
there's a law. Against, let's say, um, Providing gender-affirming
care. Or a law against providing medical assistance in
dying. Then granting an exception. To physicians who believe
they have an obligation to provide those services. Um,
IT, it's just inconsistent. Right, on the one hand,
you're saying, well, this is illegal, and on the
other hand, you're saying, well, but in, for some
people, it's not illegal. And so the, the argument
then is that there's something very problematic with that
kind of stance. Now, I don't think that's a
good argument, and the reason I don't think it's
a good argument is because once an exception is
granted, then it is no longer illegal to provide
the services. Right? And the argument um in favor
of a of um asymmetry was kind of presupposing
that what you're doing is licensing people to act
illegally. When in fact, what is being done is
not licensing doctors to act illegally. But giving them
um the uh uh a space in which uh
they they're not acting illegally, right? Um, SO I,
that's why I think it's a bad argument. Um,
THERE'S another argument which I think is, uh, warrants
more attention. And that's the argument that, well, it,
it's, if, if you allow an exception. To uh
physicians who believe they have an obligation to provide
a service. Um, THAT thwarts. The goal or purpose.
Of that law. Right, so it's not, uh, this,
it's not saying it's illegal, you know, you're granting
them the permission to act illegally. But what you're
doing is you're granting them to perform actions, which
if it's a law, the state, um, believes, um,
or the state's position is that this particular uh
activity, this particular service, um, is contrary. To, um,
you know, the values of the state. It's contrary
to um protecting citizens, which is one of the
obligations of the state. And so that argument, I
think, is stronger. Because it's, it's now saying, you
know, which it seems to me is correct to
say that it is undermining um the The underlying
goal or purpose of the law or regulation. And
that seems to me to then kind of shift
the debate, shift the controversy to another very, I
think, intriguing and challenging question, which is what are
the limits. Um, OF legitimate state interference, um, with
medical care. Um, AND to what extent? Uh, IS
it? Justified For the state to prohibit. Um, MEDICAL
services, the provision of medical services, which the profession
or professions at issue, um, uh. Their view is
these are perfectly acceptable, appropriate, uh, medical services. And
that, for example, you know, comes up in case
of gender affirming care, where most of the professional
organizations that have taken positions say, well, this is
basically should be standard of care. It, it's, it's
promoting the health and well-being of patients. And so
that raises the question, well, who should be the
ultimate arbiter of what promotes the health and well-being
of patients.
So in the cases where there's a conflict between
the patient's interests or well-being and the physician's self-interest,
what kinds of implications can there be for the
relationship between patient and physician?
Well, I think that depends on the kind of
the nature of the conflict. Um, YOU, you know,
you mentioned, uh, doctors self-interest. Well, if the self-interest
is, um, a financial interest. Uh, IF, say, uh,
the physician is recommending tests or procedures, um, because
somehow the physician will financially benefit from that, uh,
that would seem to me to kind of be
totally undermine patient trust, um, and undermine the, the
doctor-patient relationship. In the case of conscientious objection, I
think the question is whether or not um the
physicians. Um. Ability or the physician's interest in um.
Following their conscience, the physician's interest in protecting their
moral integrity. Um, WOULD have that kind of destructive
effect on the doctor-patient relationship. And I think to
a great extent, the answer to that depends on.
How the physician communicates. Their objection to the patient.
And again, this is a case where advanced notification
um might prevent this issue from even arising because
you're not put in a position where there is
this conflict. But let's say where there is an
established relationship, then the question is, how is the
objection presented. And surely if the objection is presented
in the form of a moral lecture. Um, YOU
know, which makes patients feel like they're bad people.
Um, THAT will totally just undermine, uh, the relationship
and the patient's trust in the doctor. But if
it's presented in a way that does not have
that kind of implication. Um, 11 possibility would be
not even to specify that the reason for not
providing the service, um, is a moral objection. Say,
well, um, I, I, I, I can't provide this
service. Now the patient might say, well, why not?
And then there might be a need to provide
it. But again, uh, there's a, there, there's a
way, I think. To To communicate that objection. Without
um making the patient feel like they're bad people
or making the patient feel that the, that the
physician is judging them morally. Right, that, uh, that
they have different moral beliefs. Uh, THEY'RE both worthy
of respect, and that, I think, would still, uh,
would, would be compatible with maintaining, uh, patients' trust.
Now, in some cases, patients may just not want
to have a doctor who has such divergent beliefs
than they do, but at least it could minimize
the impact it has on the doctor-patient relationship.
So let me ask you a question regarding the
beliefs and reasons that conscientious objectors might present. On
what grounds should we ethically evaluate those beliefs and
reasons?
OK, so, I've, you know, already said that I'm
kind of skeptical of requiring a full-throated philosophical justifications
of their refusal, right? Um, SUCH that they can
provide a, a, a plausible. Ethical justification, and again,
plausible to whoever is evaluating. On the other hand,
I think there are uh circumstances and situations where
asking for reasons um can be valuable. One is
to sort out objections that are based on um
discriminatory beliefs. So, um, it's one thing for physicians
to refuse to provide a service, abortion, medical assistance,
and dying, um. Contraception. It's another thing for them
to say, well, OK, I'll provide it to these
kinds of people. Uh, Christian white Christians, um, but
I won't provide it to other kind of people.
Um, BLACKS or Muslims. That's discrimination. And it's both
professionally prohibited and I think supported by defensible general
ethical principles that that kind of invidious discrimination is
morally wrong and should not be tolerated. So, insofar
as um at least some Um, exploration. Of the
patient of a physician's reasons, um, can uncover. Those
kinds of biased, um. Bases, it's, I think, uh,
justifiable. But again, that's very different from a sort
of cross-examination and, you know, requirement that it'd be
a philosophically suitable justification. Um, ANOTHER kind of situation
where probe where at least examining or considering reasons.
Um, CAN be to distinguish between what I call
these core moral beliefs and peripheral moral beliefs. So
a a discussion, and I, I would say now
here, a discussion. With someone else, whether it's a
department head, administrator, um, whatever, a discussion might, uh,
make the physician more aware. Of the fact that
it's really not that critical. Um, IT'S not that
critical when you consider the burdens that an objection
and a refusal is going to impose on others.
Uh, AND it's not only on patients that it
can impose a burden, but it can also impose
burdens on other professionals. Um, IN institutional contexts, if
one physician refuses, say, to provide, um, a routinely
offered service within that institution. Then other physicians must
be willing and available to provide it. Which means
that there's going to be a burden on those
other providers. Now, in some cases, if, if it's
a large hospital with uh lots of staff, it
may not be an um an excessive burden on
other providers, but if it's a small community hospital,
it could be. So a discussion. Uh, OF the,
the sort of the grounds for this objection might
be helpful in just to, uh, um, uh, considering
whether and having the physician consider whether or not
the burdens to others, um, is justified by They,
you know, what's at stake for them and whether
it's core or peripheral ethical beliefs. Now, a, a
final, um, consideration that might be, uh, you know,
might, uh, make it relevant to have a, again,
a discussion of reasons, um, is Whether or not
Objections are based on um. Indisputably false empirical beliefs,
demonstrably false, and I emphasize, demonstrably false clinical beliefs.
And there were some rather disturbing studies several years
ago. Um, THAT indicated, reported that, uh, pharmacists, uh,
who objected to emergency contraception, uh, a fairly substantial
proportion of them, I think up to 20% in
some cases, um, falsely, uh, confused. Emergency contraception with
mifepristone or the abortifacient. Now, insofar as those, the
objection is based on those false beliefs, and if
the pharmacist um had understood. That this is not
an abortive fiction. It's only a uh medication that
prevents um conception. Um, They wouldn't have objected. Then
it seems to me it's, it's a perfectly justifiable
situation where at least discussing the reasons is appropriate.
But I, at least I hope. That situations where,
uh, where objections are based on demonstrably false clinical
beliefs, uh, they're gonna be relatively rare.
OK, so do you think then that there is
space for physicians to practice medicine consistent consistent with
their own moral convictions, should conscientious objectors be accommodated?
Well, the short answer is yes. Um, THE more
complicated answer is yes, but, and the but is,
uh, again, um, there has to be some recognition,
um, of the patient's, uh, interest in timely access
to medical services. So I would say, yes, there
is space for conscientious objection in healthcare, provided that
the um toleration, the accommodation. IS conditioned on not
Interfering with timely access to um information and medical
services, and I would add, and does not does
not impose excessive burdens on uh other physicians, um,
which, uh, unfortunately, uh, uh, has the implication. That
whether or not conscientious objection should be accommodated is
going to be very substantially context-dependent in the sense
that or situational dependent such that um whether or
not. A refusal is going to impede. A patient's
timely access. Whether or not a patient's refu uh
a doctor's refusal, um, is going to impose excessive
burdens on other physicians, is going to depend on
a lot of factors, um, that, uh, you know,
are, are context dependent. The, um. Uh, WHAT kind
of hospital it is? Is, is it a major
health center in an urban area? Well, then it's
probably more likely that it can be accommodated as
opposed to a small rural hospital. Or is the
provider located in a small rural area where they
are, um, the only OBGYN within 200 miles. Um,
THAT is going to be, I think, um, at
least on my view, uh, very critical in deciding
whether or not conscientious objectors should be accommodated. And
so, uh, unfortunately, my view is somewhat messy. Um,
uh, RATHER than, you know, the, the sort of
blanket thing. Well, uh, here are the requirements, and
as long as these requirements are satisfied, I say,
well, let's not have the requirements focused on actions
that physicians need to, uh, provide. Let's have the
um requirements focused on providing. Patients access and avoiding
excessive burdens. So it's more um consequence-oriented requirements rather
than action requirements.
I have just one final question then. What implications
do you think these debates or these kinds of
debates like the one we're referring to today surrounding
conscientious objection can have for institutions and society more
widely?
Well, I think one way in which it uh
relates to the broader context is, um, with respect
to kind of tolerating differences. Um, AND at least
in the US, but I take it, the US
isn't alone these days. Um, THERE, there's a lot
of polarization. And one of the issues associated with
conscientious objection, whether it should be tolerated, it, it
has to do with the the extent to which
um differences are respected. So people with different beliefs
are respected, are not tolerated. Um, FOR example, if
if conscientious objection in medicine, let's focus on medicine
now. Weren't tolerated and at least accommodated in some
cases. Um, IT could lead to a medical profession
profession, um, that is, you know, not at all
diverse. So, people who had uh diverse beliefs, beliefs
that departed from the, the, the accepted view, uh,
just wouldn't be allowed within the, the profession. Um,
IF the view were taken that, well, we, we
can't tolerate these differences, then, um, it, it might
result in, um, kind of weeding out. People from
the medical professions, sort of preventing them from even
entering the medical profession if they are morally sensitive
people because the message might be, um, leave your
ethical beliefs at the door when you go into
the clinic. And that would, I think, be an
undesirable impact. So, uh, The. I think What we,
what's at stake here. Is the extent to which
um We respect. Moral differences. Um, ANOTHER kind of
Issue that's that's relevant here um is what's called
um epistemic modesty. Um, WHICH shouldn't be confused with,
uh, cultural relativism, right? It's not the view that,
uh, there are no right answers in, in ethics,
but it's the view that, well, yeah, there surely
are right answers in ethics as there is in
science, but in some cases, we still don't know
the answers. Right? Um, IS there intelligent life somewhere
else in the universe? Well, yeah, either yes or
no, but do we know? No, right now we
don't know. Uh, AND similarly with respect to some
of these issues like abortion and, uh, birth control
and medical assistance in dying, um, we may have
certain beliefs right now, um, but we should recognize.
That we often are mistaken. Uh, WE often, um,
think we, we, we know what's right or wrong.
We, we often think we know what are what
are facts, and, and, and we just, it turns
out that we are mistaken about them. Um, SO
I think there's what this debate, um, What this
debate, I think, suggests is that we have more
than an understanding of how, of the importance of
both epistemic modesty generally and also the importance of
being respectful of the views of people with whom
we disagree. And, um, you know, as much as
is justifiable and feasible, um, to give them moral
space. Um, AS long as it doesn't interfere with
some other morally important goal or objective.
Great, so the book is again conscientious Objection in
Medicine, and I'm leaving a link to it in
the description of the interview. And Mark, apart from
the book, are there any places on the internet
where people can find your work?
Uh, WELL, I've published a number of, um, I
mean, published, uh, two other books. Uh, ONE is
Unconscientious Objection. Um, THAT'S not available on the web,
but I've published numerous articles, and some of those
are available, um, well, uh, they're not open access,
but many of them are available through academic libraries.
Um. I have a, a website at the University
of Pittsburgh Center for Bioethics and Health Law, uh,
which has, uh, a, a, a, a number of
references to my work. Um. So, and, you know,
if anybody is um is interested and can't um
get a, uh, get an article, they could email
me and um I would, uh, you know, certainly
be happy to, to send them a copy of
the article.
Great, so thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show. It's been a
real pleasure to talk with you.
Well, thank you again. Thank you for inviting me,
Ricardo. It's also been a pleasure for me.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingberrd, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forst Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognun, Machael Jonathan Labranth, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal
Adrian Yei Poltonin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall,
Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolati, Gabriel Pancortez or
Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony Smith, and
Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno, Luke
Lovai, Georgios Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David Williams,
Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie
Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee Jr.
Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert Grassy,
Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark Kempel,
Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin
Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensleyman.
George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van Goler,
Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular,
Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov, Sean
Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special thanks
to my producers is are Webb, Jim Frank Lucas
Stink, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas
Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlomon Negro, Al
Nick Cortiz and Nick Golden, and to my executive
producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie.
Thank you for all.